# Peregrine Species
## The Peregrine Species
Peregrine Falcon is the common name; the scientific name is Falco peregrinus. The name means "wandering falcon". Peregrines are a species of the order Falconiformes, family Falconidae which includes 39 species of falcons. 
The peregrine is one of six falcons found in the United States. The others are Gyrfalcon, Prairie Falcon, Merlin, American Kestrel, and the Aplomado Falcon.

The Peregrine Falcon is cosmopolitan, meaning that the species is found around the world, from the Arctic to the South America. The subspecies found in the Eastern United States is anatum, and referred to as the American Peregrine Falcon.

## Falco Peregruinus
THE PEREGRINE is a large, compact falcon, measuring 14 to 18 inches (35 to 45 cm) long. The upper wings, crown and side of the head, are blue-gray, while the chest and leg feathers are white, flecked with short black horizontal stripes, increasing toward the feet (moreso on the female). Its hooked beak and outline around its large, dark eyes is yellowish.Its feet are large and possess dagger-like black claws.The birds tend to be darker in the norther regions and paler in the southerly and desert zones.
The female is called the 'falcon' and the male is the 'tiercel' (from the latin tierce; a reference to the fact that the male is about a third smaller than the female).
There are eighteen identifiable subspecies of Peregrine throughout the world, inhabiting all continents except Antartica. They are often found near sea cliffs or mountainous country though it can be found cruising open locales for prey. Peregrines from northern regions typically fly south to warmer climes during the winter months.
The Peregrine is considered an excellent flyer and a supreme hunter among birds of prey. Since ancient times in the Middle East, falconry and carries great prestige and Peregrines are highly prized by Arab falconers. From the Middle Ages to recent times, the Peregrine has been a favorite choice as a falconer's bird in Britain. It hunts for birds ranging in size from small Passerines to those as large as Geese. Typical prey includes Pigeons, Gulls, Ducks, and even Herons. It will also eat small mammals, reptiles, and insects.
Attacking with its wings drawn almost to its sides, a Peregrine's deadly accurate dive (or 'stoop') speed has been recorded between 65 to 250 mph (400 km/h).The speed of the strike alone, and the damage inflicted by the Peregrine's hind claw (ripping open the bird's back or removing its head) is often sufficient for the Peregrine to kill its victim. However, if not killed in flight, the prey will invariably die upon impact with the earth upon its release after striking. When retrieved, the prey is partly plucked before being eaten — a pile of feathers is a fair indication that a Peregrine is in the area.

### Falcon Status and Conservation
The Peregrine Falcon was listed as an Endangered Species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1972 following the catastrophic decline of the species worldwide (see threats). In response and after the banning of DDT, the Peregrine Fund, a non-profit organization, was organized with a mission to reintroduce the species into North America. 

Some of the earliest reintroduction sites included historic nesting areas in Pennsylvania during the 1970s. The Peregrine has subsequently experienced one of the most dramatic recoveries of any endangered species, and was formally removed from the federal list in 1999. The Peregrine Falcon continues to be listed by the Pennsylvania Game Commission as an Endangered species because of the small local population and continued threats.

### Growth and Development
Peregrine nest ledges are usually on cliffs or sometimes tall buildings and large bridges. The male and female falcon remain paired for life, and renew their bond with courtship activity during late winter and early spring. Their courtship is marked by special flight patterns, and by the male bringing the female food. The female peregrine lays her eggs at two-to-three day intervals, until her clutch has three to five eggs, with four the typical number. She shares the duties of incubation with her mate for approximately 31 days. 

The eyasses, or baby falcons, hatch after spending about two days "pipping" the shells with the sharp egg tooth on their beaks. At hatching, eyasses weigh approximately 1 ½ ounces, are covered in a fluffy white down, and grow rapidly. Their down is replaced by feathers in three to five weeks and they are essentially full grown at six weeks of age. 

Males develop a little faster than females. Females, however, are larger and more powerful when full grown. In the early weeks after hatch the female broods the young and feeds them with food brought her by the male. But as the demands for nourishment increase with their rapid growth, both male and female provide food for the young. By age 3 weeks they are moving about the nest site and beginning to tear meat from items brought them by their parents. Captive-raised birds released into the wild by the Hack Method are placed in the hack box at approximately 35 days of age. Between 40 and 45 days of age, young falcons begin to fly - a scary experience for the first few days. After about five days on the wind, the young falcons are much more adept. 

Juvenile birds begin to hunt for food and care for themselves at nine to 12 weeks. First prey successfully hunted may be small game such as dragonflies and butterflies, but will soon improve to include small birds. Dispersal from the hack site occurs in September or October. Young banded in southern Canada were found to migrate south to Latin America although we honestly don't know where Pennsylvania's young go during their first winter. One-year old birds remain in their juvenile, streaked plumage for their first year. They typically move to a new territory during the following spring to either pair with an existing bird or set up their own territory. By their second hatch-date, they begin to loose their old brown feathers and replace them with the plumage of adults, slate-gray backs and a lighter colored breast. Birds may return to their release site or the general area, or may wander hundreds of miles away.

Mortality in the first year of life is very high. Those few peregrines that survive to old age may reach 12 to 15 years. Most peregrines become sexually mature at two or three years of age. Occasionally egg-laying and territorial behavior may occur earlier. An adult peregrine can reach a speed of over 200 miles per hour in a vertical dive called a stoop; in level flight they average about 60 miles per hour.

### Nesting 
The Peregrine's nesting site, anaerie or eyrie, is frequently a ledge or hole in a cliff face. The falcons devote little time to building the nest, simply scraping out a shallow basin in stones or soil, or reusing an existing nest of a Raven or Crow. In coastal locales Peregrines nest among steep ocean cliffs where they prey upon nesting seabirds. Some nest sites continue to be used year after year — some for as long as centuries.

The female will lay one brood of 3 to 4 oval-shaped eggs, creamy-buff in color and usually covered by red-brown markings. In the Northern Hemisphere this usually takes place in mid-April. Both sexes will take turns incubating the eggs for 28 to 32 days when the white-downy chicks eyasses, hatch. Both parents are attentative to their young and will hunt and return with food which is torn up and fed in small strips.The eyasses will leave the nest after six weeks but will remain with their parents until the autumn, after which they will strike out on their own.

### An Endangered Species
Prior to World War II the Peregrine was widespread but uncommon in North America and Europe. However, extensive use of DDT, an organochlorine pesticide applied in massive quantities worldwide for agricultural use during the mid-1940's took a terrible toll on the species, exterminating it totally in some areas. The toxin broke down to a more stable form DDE, and made its way into natural ecosystems where it remained potent for decades. Moving up the food chain and eventually ingested by Peregrines, DDE accumulated in concentrated quantities in the fatty tissues causing death, infertility, or disrupting the female's calcium metabolism and producing thin-shelled eggs which easily crushed under the weight of an incubating adult.
Indent: dot clear gifPeregrine populations in the eastern United States, Canada, and Europe were devasted by this chemical. Before the advent of DDT a unique and stable form of the species, the Eastern Peregrine, comprising of about 800 Peregrines, nested across a vast area incorporating the Appalacians from Georgia to Maine and on to Quebec, and as far west as the Mississipi Valley and the Great Lakes. By the mid-1960's however, the birds had been completely exterminated.
West of the Great Plains, though Peregrines survived as a species, their numbers reduced to 10% of what they were prior to the advent of DDT. In the Artic areas of Canada and Alaska — far from the agricultural areas where DDT was employed — the species still died. They were exposed to the toxin when visiting their South American wintering grounds. Only along the Pacific coastline of Canada and Alaska was the species spared from most of the devistation due to the tendency of this localized subspecies, called Peale's Peregrine by taxonomists, to feed on uncontaminated seabirds. 
	
By 1965, ornithologists began to conduct conferences to discuss the tragic loss of this bird; it was estimated that by 1970 all Peregrines would be extinct. The general use of DDT was banned by the Canadian government in 1969, and by the United States in 1972. Both nations then drew up recovery plans for the endangered falcon. The US 'Endangered Species Act' of 1973 came too late to save the eastern Peregrine population but it provided protection for falcons still living elsewhere; the American Peregrine and the Artic Peregrine were both classified as endangered.
In Canada, peregrines have been on the endangered species list since 1977, at which time there were no known breeding pairs in the province of Ontario.
Today, with assistance from wildlife resource management teams in Canada and the US, Peregrine populations are begining to see a comeback, though their precarious status is still far from secure. As of the year 2000, there are 23 known breeding pairs of peregrines in Ontario. When the total reaches 40, they will be removed from the endangered list. 

### Taxonomy and systematics
alco peregrinus was first described under its current binomial name by English ornithologist Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 work Ornithologia Britannica.[20] The scientific name Falco peregrinus is a Medieval Latin phrase that was used by Albertus Magnus in 1225. The specific name taken from the fact that juvenile birds were taken while journeying to their breeding location rather than from the nest, as falcon nests were difficult to get at.[21] The Latin term for falcon, falco, is related to falx, the Latin word meaning sickle, in reference to the silhouette of the falcon's long, pointed wings in flight.

The Peregrine Falcon belongs to a genus whose lineage includes the hierofalcons[22] and the Prairie Falcon (F. mexicanus). This lineage probably diverged from other falcons towards the end of the Late Miocene or in the Early Pliocene, about 5–8 million years ago (mya). As the Peregrine-hierofalcon group includes both Old World and North American species, it is likely that the lineage originated in western Eurasia or Africa. Its relationship to other falcons is not clear; the issue is complicated by widespread hybridization confounding mtDNA sequence analyses; for example a genetic lineage of the Saker Falcon (F. cherrug) is known[23] which originated from a male Saker producing fertile young with a female Peregrine ancestor, and the descendants further breeding with Sakers.

Today, Peregrines are regularly paired in captivity with other species such as the Lanner Falcon (F. biarmicus) to produce the "perilanner", a somewhat popular bird in falconry as it combines the Peregrine's hunting skill with the Lanner's hardiness, or the Gyrfalcon to produce large, strikingly coloured birds for the use of falconers. As can be seen, the Peregrine is still genetically close to the hierofalcons, though their lineages diverged in the Late Pliocene (maybe some 2.5–2 mya in the Gelasian).

### Subspecies
Numerous subspecies of Falco peregrinus have been described, with 19 accepted by the 1994 Handbook of the Birds of the World,[4][5][26] which considers the Barbary Falcon of the Canary Islands and coastal north Africa to be two subspecies (pelegrinoides and babylonicus) of Falco peregrinus, rather than a distinct species, F. pelegrinoides. The following map shows the general ranges of these 19 subspecies:

- Falco peregrinus anatum, described by Bonaparte in 1838,[27] is known as the American Peregrine Falcon, or "Duck Hawk"; its scientific name means "Duck Peregrine Falcon". At one time, it was partly included in leucogenys. It is mainly found in the Rocky Mountains today. It was formerly common throughout North America between the tundra and northern Mexico, where current reintroduction efforts seek to restore the population.[27] Most mature anatum, except those that breed in more northern areas, winter in their breeding range. Most vagrants that reach western Europe seem to belong to the more northern and strongly migratory tundrius, only considered distinct since 1968. It is similar to peregrinus but is slightly smaller; adults are somewhat paler and less patterned below, but juveniles are darker and more patterned below. Males weigh 500 to 700 grams (1.1–1.5 lb), while females weigh 800 to 1,100 grams (1.8–2.4 lb).[28] It has become extinct in eastern North America, and populations there are hybrids as a result of reintroductions of birds from elsewhere.[29]

- Falco peregrinus babylonicus, described by P.L. Sclater in 1861, is found in eastern Iran along the Hindu Kush and Tian Shan to Mongolian Altai ranges. A few birds winter in northern and northwestern India, mainly in dry semi-desert habitats.[30] It is paler than pelegrinoides, and somewhat similar to a small, pale Lanner Falcon (Falco biarmicus). Males weigh 330 to 400 grams (12 to 14 oz), while females weigh 513 to 765 grams (18.1 to 27.0 oz).
- Falco peregrinus brookei, described by Sharpe in 1873, is also known as the Mediterranean Peregrine Falcon or the Maltese Falcon.[31] It includes caucasicus and most specimens of the proposed race punicus, though others may be pelegrinoides, Barbary Falcons (see also below), or perhaps the rare hybrids between these two which might occur around Algeria. They occur from the Iberian Peninsula around the Mediterranean, except in arid regions, to the Caucasus. They are non-migratory. It is smaller than the nominate subspecies, and the underside usually has rusty hue.[17] Males weigh around 445 grams (0.98 lb), while females weigh up to 920 grams (2.0 lb).
- Falco peregrinus calidus, described by John Latham in 1790, was formerly called leucogenys and includes caeruleiceps. It breeds in the Arctic tundra of Eurasia, from Murmansk Oblast to roughly Yana and Indigirka Rivers, Siberia. It is completely migratory, and travels south in winter as far as South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. It is often seen around wetland habitats.[32] It is paler than peregrinus, especially on the crown. Males weigh 588 to 740 grams (1.30–1.6 lb), while females weigh 925 to 1,333 grams (2.04–2.94 lb).
- Falco peregrinus cassini, described by Sharpe in 1873, is also known as the Austral Peregrine Falcon. It includes kreyenborgi, the Pallid Falcon[33] a leucistic morph occurring in southernmost South America, which was long believed to be a distinct species.[34] Its range includes South America from Ecuador through Bolivia, northern Argentina, and Chile to Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands.[17] It is non-migratory. It is similar to nominate, but slightly smaller with a black ear region. The variation kreyenborgi is medium grey above, has little barring below, and has a head pattern like the Saker Falcon, but the ear region is white.
- Falco peregrinus ernesti, described by Sharpe in 1894, is found from Indonesia to Philippines and south to Papua New Guinea and the nearby Bismarck Archipelago. Its geographical separation from nesiotes requires confirmation. It is non-migratory. It differs from the nominate subspecies in the very dark, dense barring on its underside and its black ear coverts.
- Falco peregrinus furuitii, described by Momiyama in 1927, is found on the Izu and Ogasawara Islands south of Honshū, Japan. It is non-migratory. It is very rare, and may only remain on a single island.[4] It is a dark form, resembling pealei in colour, but darker, especially on tail.
- Falco peregrinus japonensis, described by Gmelin in 1788, includes kleinschmidti, pleskei, and harterti, and seems to refer to intergrades with calidus. It is found from northeast Siberia to Kamchatka (though it is possibly replaced by pealei on the coast there) and Japan. Northern populations are migratory, while those of Japan are resident. It is similar to peregrinus, but the young are even darker than those of anatum.
- Falco peregrinus macropus, described by Swainson in 1837, is the Australian Peregrine Falcon. It is found in Australia in all regions except the southwest. It is non-migratory. It is similar to brookei in appearance, but is slightly smaller and the ear region is entirely black. The feet are proportionally large.
- Falco peregrinus madens, described by Ripley and Watson in 1963, is unusual in having some sexual dichromatism. If the Barbary Falcon (see below) is considered a distinct species, it is sometimes placed therein. It is found in the Cape Verde Islands, and is non-migratory;[17] it is endangered with only six to eight pairs surviving.[4] Males have a rufous wash on crown, nape, ears, and back; underside conspicuously washed pinkish-brown. Females are tinged rich brown overall, especially on the crown and nape.
- Falco peregrinus minor, first described by Bonaparte in 1850. It was formerly often perconfusus.[35] It is sparsely and patchily distributed throughout much of sub-Saharan Africa and widespread in Southern Africa. It apparently reaches north along the Atlantic coast as far as Morocco. It is non-migratory, crow-sized, and dark coloured.
Falco peregrinus nesiotes, described by Mayr in 1941,[36] is found in Fiji and probably also Vanuatu and New Caledonia. It is non-migratory.
- Falco peregrinus pealei, described by Ridgway in 1873, is also known as Peale's Falcon, and includes rudolfi.[38] It is found in the Pacific Northwest of North America, northwards from the Puget Sound along the British Columbia coast (including the Queen Charlotte Islands), along the Gulf of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands to the far eastern Bering Sea coast of Russia,[38] and may also occur on the Kuril Islands and the coasts of Kamchatka. It is non-migratory. It is the largest subspecies, and it looks like an oversized and darker tundrius or like a strongly barred and large anatum. The bill is very wide.[39] Juveniles occasionally have pale crowns. Males weigh 700 to 1,000 grams (1.5–2.2 lb), while females weigh 1,000 to 1,500 grams (2.2–3.3 lb).
- Falco peregrinus pelegrinoides, first described by Temminck in 1829, is found in the Canary Islands through north Africa and the Near East to Mesopotamia. It is most similar to brookei, but is markedly paler above, with a rusty neck, and is a light buff with reduced barring below. It is smaller than the nominate subspecies; females weigh around 610 grams (1.3 lb).[5]
Falco peregrinus peregrinator, described by Sundevall in 1837, is known as the Indian Peregrine Falcon, Black Shaheen, Indian Shaheen [40] or Shaheen Falcon.[41] It was formerly sometimes known as Falco atriceps or Falco shaheen. Its range includes South Asia from Pakistan across India and Bangladesh to Sri Lanka and Southeastern China. In India, the Shaheen is reported from all states except Uttar Pradesh, mainly from rocky and hilly regions. The Shaheen is also reported from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal.[30] It has a clutch size of 3 to 4 eggs, with the chicks fledging time of 48 days with an average nesting success of 1.32 chicks per nest. In India, apart from nesting on cliffs, it has also been recorded as nesting on man-made structures such as buildings and cellphone transmission towers.[30] A population estimate of 40 breeding pairs in Sri Lanka was made in 1996.[42] It is non-migratory, and is small and dark, with rufous underparts. In Sri Lanka this species is found to favour the higher hills while the migrant calidus is more often seen along the coast.
- Falco peregrinus peregrinus, the nominate (first-named) subspecies, described by Tunstall in 1771, breeds over much of temperate Eurasia between the tundra in the north and the Pyrenees, Mediterranean region and Alpide belt in the south.[27] It is mainly non-migratory in Europe, but migratory in Scandinavia and Asia. Males weigh 580 to 750 grams (1.3–1.7 lb), while females weigh 925 to 1,300 grams (2.04–2.9 lb).[5] It includes brevirostris, germanicus, rhenanus, and riphaeus.
- Falco peregrinus radama, described by Hartlaub in 1861, is found in Madagascar and Comoros. It is non-migratory.
- Falco peregrinus submelanogenys, described by Mathews in 1912, is the Southwest Australian Peregrine Falcon. It is found in southwest Australia and is non-migratory.
- Falco peregrinus tundrius, described by C.M. White in 1968, was at one time included in leucogenys It is found in the Arctic tundra of North America to Greenland, and migrates to wintering grounds in Central and South America.[39] Most vagrants that reach western Europe belong to this subspecies, which was previously united with anatum. It is the New World equivalent to calidus. It is smaller than anatum. It is also paler than anatum; most have a conspicuous white forehead and white in ear region, but the crown and "moustache" are very dark, unlike in calidus.[39] Juveniles are browner, and less grey, than in calidus, and paler, sometimes almost sandy, than in anatum. Males weigh 500 to 700 grams (1.1–1.5 lb), while females weigh 800 to 1,100 grams (1.8–2.4 lb).

### Ecology and behaviour
The Peregrine Falcon lives mostly along mountain ranges, river valleys, coastlines, and increasingly in cities.[17] In mild-winter regions, it is usually a permanent resident, and some individuals, especially adult males, will remain on the breeding territory. Only populations that breed in Arctic climates typically migrate great distances during the northern winter.

The Peregrine Falcon reaches faster speeds than any other animal on the planet when performing the stoop,[7] which involves soaring to a great height and then diving steeply at speeds of over 320 km/h (200 mph), hitting one wing of its prey so as not to harm itself on impact.[6] The air pressure from a 200 mph (320 km/h) dive could possibly damage a bird's lungs, but small bony tubercles on a falcon's nostrils guide the powerful airflow away from the nostrils, enabling the bird to breathe more easily while diving by reducing the change in air pressure.[53] To protect their eyes, the falcons use their nictitating membranes (third eyelids) to spread tears and clear debris from their eyes while maintaining vision. A study testing the flight physics of an "ideal falcon" found a theoretical speed limit at 400 km/h (250 mph) for low altitude flight and 625 km/h (390 mph) for high altitude flight.[54] In 2005, Ken Franklin recorded a falcon stooping at a top speed of 389 km/h (242 mph).[9]
The life span of Peregrine Falcons in the wild is up to 15.5 years.[5] Mortality in the first year is 59–70%, declining to 25–32% annually in adults.[5] Apart from such anthropogenic threats as collision with human-made objects, the Peregrine may be killed by eagles or large owls.

The Peregrine Falcon is host to a range of parasites and pathogens. It is a vector for Avipoxvirus, Newcastle disease virus, Falconid herpesvirus 1 (and possibly other Herpesviridae), and some mycoses and bacterial infections. Endoparasites include Plasmodium relictum (usually not causing malaria in the Peregrine Falcon), Strigeidae trematodes, Serratospiculum amaculata (nematode), and tapeworms. Known Peregrine Falcon ectoparasites are chewing lice,[56] Ceratophyllus garei (a flea), and Hippoboscidae flies (Icosta nigra, Ornithoctona erythrocephala).

